After the revplution of Web 3.0 the world came to know about lots of new technologies and in that Cryptocurrency are one of them. Cryptocurrency are new form of digital currency .As a beginner its very difficult to understand some of terms used in cryptocurrency and also hard to memorise them. Therefore this guide completely aims to provide you with an introduction key concepts such as About cryptocurrency ,cryptocurrency exchanges, market capitalisation and role of decentralised finance(DeFi)helping you navigate this unique and evolving landscape.
As a beginner question arises what does Crypotcurrency means and why they came in existense when we already have some fiat currencies then what is use of cryptocurrency? Answers to all above quesitons are Cryptocurrency is a digital or virtual form of currency that uses cryptography for secure financial transcations.It operates on decentralised network called blockchain which is distributed ledger that records all transcations across a network of computers.These came into existence to address some of the limitations of traditional fiat currencies such as government contrl ,lack of transparency and also lots of counterfeit currency.Some of the main reasons to create cyptocurrency were Decentralised, secure, transparent and borderless transactions.
Since now you are familiar with Cryptocurrency now lets cover the main topics:

Crypto Exchanges :
        These are digital platform that allow users to buy sell and trade with various cryptocurrencies. They serve as intermediaries ,connection buyers and sellers in a secure and efficient manner.They provide users with a wallets to store their digital assests and facilitate transactions.Some of well known crypocurrency exchange are Coinbase, Binance and Karken.It is very important to research and choose reputable exchanges that prioritise security and have user friendly interface.
        and also the most popular and straight forward way of buying and selling  and staking digit assest is through a digital currency or cryptocurrency exchange.


Market Capitalization:
            It referes to the total value of a cryptocurrency.Basically this is used as a indicator to show dominance and popularity of a particular cryptocurrency which can be further used by investors to invest in that particular cryptocurrency before trading or investing in that . It is calculated with the followin formula:
            
            Market cap=(Price)*(ciruclating supply)

            For investment purpose investors choose that cryptocurrency which are of High capitalization value than small captalisation because small capitalisation are also considered to be highlu risky and sometimes with a lot of potential of short term gorwth.Today Bitcoin is largest cryptocurrency by market capatalisation followed by Ethereum.

Decentralised Finance(DeFi):
            DeFi stands for Decentralised Finance which is rapidly growing sector with cryptocurrency ecosystem.     This technology is based upon secure distributed ledgers. The main aim of this is to eleminate third parties and centralised institution from financial transactions.This is achieved by making individuals to hold peer to peer digital exchange  in secure digital wallet through this they can transfer funds in minutes and anyone with internet connections can use DeFi.To make you more clear with an example when you do a payment through any UPI method that service provider charges some money for providing that particular service where as in DeFi system there is no third party involvement so it will cut off the cost of third part and trade can be done in between two people.Technology used by Defi is blockchain that's why they are moer secure and also fast and payment is done through decentralised app.

Through above topics you will come to know about how cryptocurrency are much more secure and better system than our old system. They dont have only impact on our life but on market too. For example mostof the market exchanges get closed after some time but crypto exchange can carry om for 24/7. This could be advantage and very challenging to new people but it is filled with lots of opportunities and much more secure.
In conclsuion basic knowledge of Cryptocurrency is much more needed in the current world because this is going to be future and also these are much more secure system right now.